Crustacean and rotifer density and biomass were measured from 2014 to 2022 in five drinking water reservoirs in southwestern Virginia, USA. These reservoirs are: Beaverdam Reservoir (Vinton, Virginia), Falling Creek Reservoir (Vinton, Virginia), Carvins Cove Reservoir (Roanoke, Virginia), Gatewood Reservoir (Pulaski, Virginia), and Spring Hollow Reservoir (Salem, Virginia). Beaverdam, Falling Creek, Carvins Cove and Spring Hollow Reservoirs are owned and operated by the Western Virginia Water Authority as primary or secondary drinking water sources for Roanoke, Virginia, and Gatewood Reservoir is a drinking water source for the Town of Pulaski, Virginia. The dataset consists of integrated vertical tow samples from the whole water column, just the epilimnion, and just the hypolimnion (as the difference between the full water column and epilimnion tows), as well as discrete depth measurements collected with a Schindler trap. Most samples were collected at the deepest site of each reservoir adjacent to the dam. Sampling frequency and duration varied among reservoirs and years and included weekly to monthly routine monitoring as well as intensive 24-hour sampling campaigns. In 2014-2016, zooplankton samples were collected approximately fortnightly in the spring, summer, and autumn months at Beaverdam Reservoir, Carvins Cove Reservoir, and Gatewood Reservoirs. Falling Creek Reservoir samples were collected weekly to monthly in spring and summer 2014, and Spring Hollow Reservoir samples were collected approximately fortnightly in the spring, summer, and autumn months of 2015 and 2016. In 2019, zooplankton samples were collected approximately weekly to monthly from April to November at Beaverdam Reservoir and April to September at Falling Creek Reservoir. In 2020, zooplankton samples were collected approximately weekly to monthly from May to December at Beaverdam Reservoir and June to September at Falling Creek Reservoir. In 2021 and 2022, zooplankton were collected monthly from March to December in 2021 and January to May in 2022 at Beaverdam Reservoir. Falling Creek Reservoir zooplankton samples in 2021 and 2022 were sparsely collected. During the 24-hour sampling campaigns conducted in Beaverdam Reservoir from 2019-2022, samples were collected from both a deep pelagic site and a shallow littoral site.