We calculated the discharge rate of water in cubic meters per second at multiple tributaries flowing into Falling Creek Reservoir, Beaverdam Reservoir, and Carvins Cove Reservoir; and the outflow of Falling Creek using four different methods: cross-sectional discharge calculations via a handheld flowmeter, velocity float, salt injections, or bucket volumetric measurements. 

For the flowmeter method, discharge was estimated by measuring the velocity (in meters per second) using a propeller flowmeter (Forestry Supplies, Inc. Model FP 111) or an instantaneous velocity meter (Hach FH950 Portable Velocity Meter) and depth (in m) at 0.1-0.5 m width intervals, usually 0.1 m, along a cross-section of the stream. The velocity was multiplied by the width and depth to calculate discharge at each transect, which were then summed to calculate total discharge along the stream width, following the methods in Gordon et al. (2004) and detailed further within the standard operating protocol (SOP) included in this data package. 

For the salt injection method, discharge was calculated by injecting a known mass of NaCl (in g) based on the stream width (see SOP included in this data package for more information) into the stream and measuring the change in conductivity over time downstream using an EcoSense (EC 300A, serial number JC01635) conductivity meter, following Gordon et al. (2004). Conductivity measurements were taken at 3-second intervals until the conductivity returned to baseline readings (see SOP for more information). 

When streamflow was not conducive to using flowmeter or salt injection methods, discharge was estimated using a velocity float or bucket volumetric method, following methods outlined in Gordon et al. (2004) and within the SOP included in this data package. The velocity float method calculated velocity by measuring the time taken for a float to move a known distance, then was multiplied by the measured width and depth to calculate discharge (see SOP attached for further information). The bucket volumetric method was used when streamflow was channelized through an elevated location (similar to a hose spigot), and a bucket and stopwatch were used to quantify how long it took to fill a known volume in a bucket from the spigot (see SOP attached for further information). For an example calculation illustrating our bucket volumetric method, please see the .xlsx file attached to this data product titled 'CCR_VolumetricFlow_2020_2022_calculations.xlsx'. The bucket volumetric flow method .xlsx file was used from 2020 – 2022 and any data collected after 2022 that used this method were processed using the "manual-discharge_qaqc_2019_2024.R" script. The "manual-discharge_qaqc_2019_2024.R" script was used to calculate and QAQC discharge measurements via the flowmeter from 2019 - 2025. 

Data were collected at different frequencies throughout the monitoring period. In 2016, there was one discharge measurement from Falling Creek in this dataset. In 2019, data were collected weekly to monthly from February through October at Falling Creek and Beaverdam Reservoirs. In 2020, data were collected approximately monthly at Falling Creek Reservoir. In 2021, data were collected seasonally in Falling Creek Reservoir and approximately monthly at Carvins Cove. In 2022, data were collected approximately monthly at Carvins Cove and Falling Creek Reservoirs. In 2023, data were collected approximately seasonally in 2023 at Carvins Cove and Falling Creek Reservoirs. In 2024, data were collected approximately monthly at Falling Creek and Carvins Cove Reservoirs. In 2025, data were collected approximately bimonthly at Falling Creek and weekly to fortnightly at Carvins Cove. All data were collected in local time (either EST or EDT), and if time was not recorded when sampling, a 1 flag was added to the flag_datetime column and the time was set to 12pm.

Discharge from 2025 was calculated using equations in the R script "manual-discharge_qaqc_2019_2025.R" and "manual-discharge_inspection_2019_2025.Rmd" was used to validate data and apply additional flags. Flags for discharge include: flag 1 = Instrument malfunction, values set to NA,	flag 3 = Value suspect, conditions not well captured by flowmeter method,	flag 5 = Value suspect, conditions not well captured by velocity float method. A csv of dates and sites that these flags apply to are recorded in "manual-discharge_maintenancelog_2019_2025.csv".


See the 'site_descriptions.csv' file for a full description and geographical coordinates of the sites included in this data package.

References:
Gordon, N.D., T.A. McMahon, and B.L. Finlayson. 2004. Stream Hydrology: an Introduction for Ecologists, 2nd edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
