Bathymetry

Bathymetric data for Falling Creek Reservoir, Beaverdam Reservoir, and Carvin's Cove Reservoir (Vinton, VA, USA) were estimated following standard methods (e.g., Wahl and Vermeyen 1998). Both reservoirs are owned and operated as primary and secondary drinking water supplies, respectively, by the Western Virginia Water Authority (WVWA). The data were collected using an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP; RD Instruments, San Diego, CA, USA) operated from a moving boat when both reservoirs were at full pond: ~9.3 m for Falling Creek Reservoir, ~13.5 m for Beaverdam Reservoir, and ~23 m for Carvins Cove Reservoir. Global positioning system (GPS) data were collected simultaneously with the ADCP data collection over multiple transects across both waterbodies. Data from Falling Creek Reservoir and Carvins Cove Reservoir were collected in summer/fall 2012 and data from Beaverdam Reservoir were collected in July 2014. The ADCP and GPS data were processed using WinRiver II software (RD Instruments). To determine hypsometric contours, summary statistics were generated using the Surface Volume (3D Analyst) tool in the 3D Analyst Toolbox in ArcGIS (Esri, Redlands, CA, USA). The data are presented as hypsometric relationships of surface area and volume for 0.3-1.0 m depth intervals in the two reservoirs, as well as in spatially-explicit shapefiles and triangular irregular networks (TIN) files. FCR and BVR spatial bathymetry files use the D North American 1983 coordinate system. CCR spatial bathymetry files use the WGS 1984 UTM Zone 17N coordinate system.

Watershed

Watershed delineation for CCR was conducted using the StreamStats basin delineation tool provided by the United States Geological Survey (USGS; https://streamstats.usgs.gov/ss/). Watershed delineation for FCR and BVR was conducted within ArcGIS Pro using the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer 15 second global digital elevation mode (NASA ASTER GDEM) and the HydroSHEDS stream network layer (Lehner et al. 2008) following the method outlined in Merwade (2012). FCR and BVR watershed files use the D North American 1983 coordinate system. CCR watershed files use the WGS 1984 coordinate system. 


References

Lehner B, Verdin K, Jarvis A. 2008. New global hydrography derived from spaceborne elevation data. Eos Trans AGU. 89:93–94.

Merwade V. 2012. Watershed and stream network delineation using ArcHydro tools. Purdue (IN): University of Purdue, School of Civil Engineering, Printed Lecture Note.

U.S. Geological Survey, 2016, The StreamStats program, online at http://streamstats.usgs.gov, accessed on (27 October 2022).

Wahl, T. and T. Vermeyen (1998). Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) Measurements of Velocity Fields on Upper Klamath Lake Approaching the A-Canal Intake. USBR Report.