We calculated the discharge rate of water in cubic meters per second at multiple tributaries flowing into Falling Creek Reservoir, Beaverdam Reservoir, and Carvins Cove Reservoir using four different methods: a handheld flowmeter probe, salt injection, velocity float, or bucket volumetric with cross-sectional discharge calculations. For the flowmeter method, discharge was estimated by measuring the velocity (in meters per second) using a propeller flowmeter (Forestry Supplies, Inc. Model FP 111) or an instantaneous velocity meter (Marsh-Mcbirney Flo-Mate Model 2000656) and depth (in m) at 0.1-0.5 m width intervals, usually 0.1 m, along a cross-section of the stream. The velocity was multiplied by the width and depth, to calculate discharge at each transect, which were then summed to calculate total discharge along the stream width, following the methods in Gordon et al. (2004) and detailed further within the standard operating protocol (SOP) included in this data package. For the salt injection method, discharge was calculated by injecting a known mass (in g) determined as a relative proportion of stream width (see SOP included in this data package for more information) of NaCl into the stream and measuring the change in conductivity over time downstream using an EcoSense (EC 300A, serial number JC01635) conductivity meter, following Gordon et al. (2004). Conductivity measurements were taken at 3-second intervals until the conductivity returned to baseline readings (see SOP for more information). When streamflow was not conducive to using flowmeter or salt injection methods, discharge was estimated using a velocity float or bucket volumetric method, following methods outlined in Gordon et al. (2004) and within the SOP included in this data package. For an example illustrating the bucket volumetric method, please see the .xlsx file attached to this data product titled 'CCR_VolumetricFlow_2020_2022_calculations.xlsx'. 

See the 'site_descriptions.csv' file for a full description and GPS coordinates of the sites included in this data package.

References:
Gordon, N.D., T.A. McMahon, and B.L. Finlayson. 2004. Stream Hydrology: an Introduction for Ecologists, 2nd edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.