Bathymetry

Bathymetric data for Falling Creek Reservoir (FCR; Vinton, VA, USA), Beaverdam Reservoir (BVR; Vinton, VA, USA), and Carvins Cove Reservoir (CCR; Roanoke, VA, USA) were estimated following standard methods (e.g., Wahl and Vermeyen 1998). All three reservoirs are owned and operated as either primary (FCR and CCR) or secondary (BVR) drinking water supplies by the Western Virginia Water Authority (WVWA). 

Data from CCR were collected in fall 2012 when the reservoir was at full pond (~23 m). Data from FCR were collected in July 2023 when the reservoir was at full pond (~10.1 m). Data from BVR were collected in April 2024 when the reservoir was ~10.5 m deep, which is below the full pond depth of 13 m. 


The data were collected using an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP; RD Instruments, San Diego, CA, USA) operated from a moving boat. Global positioning system (DSM 232 GPS Receiver, Trimble) data were collected simultaneously with the ADCP data collection over multiple transects across both waterbodies. The ADCP and GPS data were processed using WinRiver II software (RD Instruments) and USGS Velocity Mapping Toolbox. To determine hypsometric contours, summary statistics were generated using the Surface Volume (3D Analyst) tool in the 3D Analyst Toolbox in ArcGIS (Esri, Redlands, CA, USA). 

The data are presented as hypsometric relationships of surface area and volume for 0.5 m depth intervals in the three reservoirs (Bathymetry_combined_Final.csv). Additionally, spatially-explicit shapefiles, rasters, and triangular irregular networks (TIN) files, are provided for generating bathymetric maps with projections are in the WGS 1984 UTM Zone 17N coordinate system. These files are provided in the 'Bathymetry_Spatial_Data_EDI' folder and organized by reservoir. Each folder contains a readME file that further explains folder structure. Each reservoir folder also contains the raw spatial data (latitude, longitude, depth) used to generate bathymetry files. 

Since BVR bathymetry was measured when the reservoir was not at full pond, we interpolated bathymetry values from the April 2024 measurements to determine hypsometry values when at full pond (BVR_bathy_fullpond_interp.R). Bathymetry values from April 2024 were first adjusted to represent depths at full pond (i.e., all 2.5 m was added to all depths, as the maximum depth on sampling date was 10.5 m, but full pond depth is 13 m). Using these values we then calculated hypsometry surface area and volume values for these depths (described above). We then identified BVR surface area at full pond using the shapefile of the reservoir from the USGS National Map, which identifies the surface area as 0.271 km^2 at full pond. We used this value to then fit a polynomial function of surface area to depth and used that relationship to estimate surface area at our missing depths. Next we fit a separate polynomial function to estimate volume for each depth from surface area, and used this relationship to interpolate missing volume data. All interpolated values for surface area and volume are denoted with a Flag of 1 in the Flag_SA_m2 or Flag_Volume_L columns of (Bathymetry_combined_Final.csv). Additionally the derived hypsometry values prior to interpolation are provided in the folder 'hypsometry' within 'Bathymetry_Spatial_Data_EDI'. 

A comprehensive document outlining the standard operating procedure for the ADCP - from ADCP setup to post data processing - is available (file ADCP_SOP.pdf). 

The ArcGIS files included in this package, allow users to create a detailed bathymetric map of all three reservoirs from various shapefiles and TIN files. We recommend using the provided TIN and raster files within 'Bathymetry_Spatial_Data_EDI' for highest resolution bathymetry data. 

A script, titled FCR_Bathymetry_Maps_in_R.Rmd, is included and can be used to produce a bathymetric map in leaflet in RStudio. It uses ADCP depth data that has been processed in VMT, converts the points to NAD 1983 UTM zone 17N, and generates a raster. The raster is then used to create the map, as well as calculate surface area and volume according to equations from Manual of Fisheries Survey Methods II (Taube, 2000). This workflow is currently only designed for FCR bathymetry but is provided for possible exploratory use in BVR and CCR.


Watershed

Watershed delineation for CCR was conducted using the StreamStats basin delineation tool provided by the United States Geological Survey (USGS; https://streamstats.usgs.gov/ss/). Watershed delineation for FCR and BVR was conducted within ArcGIS Pro using the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer 15 second global digital elevation mode (NASA ASTER GDEM) and the HydroSHEDS stream network layer (Lehner et al. 2008) following the method outlined in Merwade (2012).


References

Lehner B, Verdin K, Jarvis A. 2008. New global hydrography derived from spaceborne elevation data. Eos Trans AGU. 89:93–94.

Merwade V. 2012. Watershed and stream network delineation using ArcHydro tools. Purdue (IN): University of Purdue, School of Civil Engineering, Printed Lecture Note.

Taube, C. M. 2000. Instructions for winter lake mapping. Chapter 12 in J. C. Schneider, editor. Manual of fisheries survey methods II: with periodic updates. Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Fisheries Special Report 25, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. https://www2.dnr.state.mi.us/publications/pdfs/DNRFishLibrary/Special-ManagementReports/SR25.pdf

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2024. NHDPlus dataset. https://www.epa.gov/waterdata/get-nhdplus-national-hydrography-dataset-plus-data.

U.S. Geological Survey, 2016, The StreamStats program, online at http://streamstats.usgs.gov, accessed on (27 October 2022).

Virginia Geographic Information Network (VGIN). 2024. DEM data. Virginia LiDAR Download Application. https://vgin.vdem.virginia.gov/apps/VGIN::virginia-lidar-download-application/explore.

Wahl, T. and T. Vermeyen (1998). Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) Measurements of Velocity Fields on Upper Klamath Lake Approaching the A-Canal Intake. USBR Report.